.TH ZTMUX 1 "2026-07-02" "ztmux 3.7.2" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
ztmux \- terminal multiplexer, a from-source Rust port of tmux
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ztmux
.RB [ \-2CDlNquvV ]
.RB [ \-c
.IR shell-command ]
.RB [ \-f
.IR file ]
.RB [ \-L
.IR socket-name ]
.RB [ \-S
.IR socket-path ]
.RB [ \-T
.IR features ]
.RI [ command
.RI [ flags ]]
.br
.B ztmux
.RB [ \-L
.IR socket-name ]
.RB [ \-S
.IR socket-path ]
.B dashboard
.br
.B ztmux
.RB [ \-L
.IR socket-name ]
.RB [ \-S
.IR socket-path ]
.B switch
.br
.B ztmux
.RB [ \-L
.IR socket-name ]
.RB [ \-S
.IR socket-path ]
.B tree
.br
.B ztmux
.RB [ \-L
.IR socket-name ]
.RB [ \-S
.IR socket-path ]
.B doctor
.RB [ \-o
.IR json ]
.br
.B ztmux
.RB [ \-L
.IR socket-name ]
.RB [ \-S
.IR socket-path ]
.B stats
.RB [ \-o
.IR json ]
.br
.B ztmux
.RB [ \-L
.IR socket-name ]
.RB [ \-S
.IR socket-path ]
.B graph
.RB [ \-o
.IR dot | mermaid | html ]
.br
.B ztmux
.RB [ \-L
.IR socket-name ]
.RB [ \-S
.IR socket-path ]
.B watch
.br
.B ztmux
.RB [ \-L
.IR socket-name ]
.RB [ \-S
.IR socket-path ]
.B events
.RB [ \-n
.IR ms ]
.RB [ \-\-count
.IR N ]
.br
.B ztmux
.RB [ \-L
.IR socket-name ]
.RB [ \-S
.IR socket-path ]
.B ps
.RB [ \-o
.IR json ]
.br
.B ztmux
.RB [ \-L
.IR socket-name ]
.RB [ \-S
.IR socket-path ]
.B snapshot
.br
.B ztmux
.RB [ \-L
.IR socket-name ]
.RB [ \-S
.IR socket-path ]
.B prune
.RB [ \-\-dead ]
.RB [ \-\-empty ]
.RB [ \-\-idle
.IR secs ]
.RB [ \-f ]
.br
.B ztmux
.RB [ \-L
.IR socket-name ]
.RB [ \-S
.IR socket-path ]
.B layout
.I name
.RB [ \-t
.IR window ]
.RB [ \-f ]
.br
.B ztmux
.RB [ \-L
.IR socket-name ]
.RB [ \-S
.IR socket-path ]
.B find
.I query
.RB [ \-o
.IR json ]
.br
.B ztmux
.RB [ \-L
.IR socket-name ]
.RB [ \-S
.IR socket-path ]
.B recent
.RB [ \-o
.IR json ]
.br
.B ztmux
.RB [ \-L
.IR socket-name ]
.RB [ \-S
.IR socket-path ]
.B usage
.RB [ \-o
.IR json ]
.br
.B ztmux
.RB [ \-L
.IR socket-name ]
.RB [ \-S
.IR socket-path ]
.B grep
.I pattern
.RB [ \-a ]
.RB [ \-o
.IR json ]
.br
.B ztmux
.RB [ \-L
.IR socket-name ]
.RB [ \-S
.IR socket-path ]
.B peek
.RB [ \-t
.IR substr ]
.RB [ \-o
.IR json ]
.br
.B ztmux
.RB [ \-L
.IR socket-name ]
.RB [ \-S
.IR socket-path ]
.B bcast
.I command
.RB [ \-c
.IR substr ]
.RB [ \-s
.IR session ]
.RB [ \-N ]
.RB [ \-f ]
.br
.B ztmux
.RB [ \-L
.IR socket-name ]
.RB [ \-S
.IR socket-path ]
.B pstree
.RB [ \-o
.IR json ]
.br
.B ztmux
.RB [ \-L
.IR socket-name ]
.RB [ \-S
.IR socket-path ]
.B ports
.RB [ \-o
.IR json ]
.br
.B ztmux
.RB [ \-L
.IR socket-name ]
.RB [ \-S
.IR socket-path ]
.B info
.I target
.RB [ \-o
.IR json ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ztmux
is a terminal multiplexer: it lets a number of terminals be created,
accessed, and controlled from a single screen.
.B ztmux
may be detached from a screen and continue running in the background, then
later reattached.
.PP
It is a from-source port of
.BR tmux (1)
to Rust \(em the whole program (server, client, the grid and screen model,
the input parser, layouts, the command language, formats, and the terminal
back end), not a wrapper around the
.B tmux
binary and not control mode.
.PP
When
.B ztmux
is started it creates a new session with a single window and displays it on
screen. A status line at the bottom of the screen shows information on the
current session and is used to enter interactive commands.
.PP
A session is a single collection of pseudo terminals under the management of
.BR ztmux .
Each session has one or more windows linked to it. A window occupies the
entire screen and may be split into rectangular panes, each of which is a
separate pseudo terminal. Any number of
.B ztmux
instances may connect to the same session, and any number of windows may be
present in the same session.
.PP
.B ztmux
keeps its state in a single server process, which manages all the clients,
sessions, windows, and panes.
.SS Compatibility with tmux
.B ztmux
is a drop-in reimplementation and deliberately shares
.BR tmux (1)'s
runtime conventions so existing configuration and tooling keep working:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
the client and server speak tmux's wire protocol over a socket kept under
.IR $TMUX_TMPDIR / tmux- UID / (default
.IR /tmp/tmux- UID /);
.IP \(bu 2
configuration is read from the tmux search path (see
.B FILES
below), i.e.
.I ~/.tmux.conf
by default;
.IP \(bu 2
the server exports
.B $TMUX
to each pane, identifying the socket, session, and pane.
.RE
.PP
A running
.B ztmux
server is therefore reachable by any tmux-protocol client (including the
.B ztmux
binary itself, native GUI clients, and the standard
.BR tmux (1)
commands where compatible).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-2
Force
.B ztmux
to assume the terminal supports 256 colours.
.TP
.B \-C
Start in control mode. Given twice
.RB ( \-CC )
disables echo.
.TP
.B \-D
Do not start the server as a daemon; run it in the foreground.
.TP
.BR \-c " " \fIshell-command\fP
Execute
.I shell-command
using the default shell and exit.
.TP
.BR \-f " " \fIfile\fP
Specify an alternative configuration
.IR file .
.TP
.B \-l
Behave as a login shell.
.TP
.BR \-L " " \fIsocket-name\fP
Use a different
.I socket-name
under the
.B ztmux
socket directory rather than the default
.RB ( default ).
.TP
.B \-N
Do not start the server even if the command would normally do so.
.TP
.B \-q
Suppress the printing of "no server running" style informational messages
where applicable.
.TP
.BR \-S " " \fIsocket-path\fP
Specify a full alternative path to the server socket.
.TP
.BR \-T " " \fIfeatures\fP
Set terminal
.I features
for the client, as a comma-separated list.
.TP
.B \-u
Assume the terminal supports UTF-8.
.TP
.B \-V
Report the
.B ztmux
version and exit.
.TP
.B \-v
Request verbose logging. May be specified multiple times for more detail.
.PP
The remaining arguments,
.IR command " and " flags ,
select a tmux command (for example
.BR new-session ", " list-sessions ", or " split-window )
and its options. With no command,
.B ztmux
attaches to the most recently used session, creating one if none exists.
.SH EXTENSIONS
The following capabilities are original to
.B ztmux
and have no counterpart in upstream
.BR tmux (1).
They live in the extension layer of the code base and are held apart from the
ported core.
.SS Structured output
The listing commands
.BR list-sessions ", " list-windows ", " list-panes ", " list-clients ,
and
.B list-buffers
accept
.B \-o
.I format
to emit machine-readable output instead of a formatted text line:
.RS
.TP
.B json
A pretty-printed JSON array of objects, one per item, with numbers and
booleans typed natively and strings escaped.
.TP
.BR jsonl " (or " ndjson )
One JSON object per line (newline-delimited JSON), with no enclosing array.
.TP
.B csv
RFC 4180 comma-separated values with a header row.
.TP
.B tsv
Tab-separated values with a header row.
.TP
.B table
Human-readable, whitespace-aligned columns with a header and a rule.
.RE
.PP
Each format uses a stable, per-command field schema, driven by the same
.RB #{ ... }
format engine as the text output, so the
.B \-f
.I filter
option still applies. An unrecognised
.I format
is an error. For example:
.PP
.RS
.EX
ztmux list\-panes \-a \-o json
ztmux list\-sessions \-o table
.EE
.RE
.SS ztmux dashboard
.B ztmux dashboard
launches a live full-screen dashboard of the running server: a navigable
session\(->window\(->pane tree, a detail panel (a pane table for the selected
window, pane details for a selected pane, or session and client details for a
selected session), a live
.B capture-pane
preview of the selected pane, header counts, and a pane-count sparkline. It
refreshes once per second.
Keys:
.BR j / k " or " \(ua / \(da
move,
.BR g / G
jump to top/bottom,
.B Enter
focus the selection (attach the client to it),
.B r
refresh now,
.B x
kill the selection \(en session, window, or pane \(en (with confirmation),
.B ?
toggle help, and
.BR q " or " Escape
quit. The mouse wheel scrolls the tree and a left click selects the row under
the cursor.
It is a client subcommand that reads the server through the structured output
above and targets the socket selected by
.BR \-L / \-S .
.SS ztmux switch
.B ztmux switch
opens an interactive fuzzy picker over every session, window, and pane. Type
to filter (case-insensitive subsequence match); the selection is applied with
.BR switch-client ", " select-window ,
and
.B select-pane
on
.BR Enter ;
.B Escape
cancels.
.SS ztmux tree
.B ztmux tree
prints the whole server as a one-shot session\(->window\(->pane ASCII tree
(coloured when stdout is a terminal, plain when piped). It is built from the
same structured output and targets the socket selected by
.BR \-L / \-S .
.SS ztmux doctor
.B ztmux doctor
runs a one-shot health check of the build, the terminal environment
.RB ( TERM ,
terminfo, colour, locale), the resolved socket, the reachable server, and
resource limits. Output is a grouped, coloured report, or a machine-readable
object with
.B \-o
.I json
(or
.BR \-\-json ).
The process exit status is the worst severity seen \(en 0 all ok, 1 warnings,
2 errors \(en so it drops into a CI gate. It is safe to run with no server up.
.SS ztmux stats
.B ztmux stats
prints a one-shot summary of the server: session/window/pane/client counts,
attached and dead counts, the busiest session, the largest window, the oldest
session, and a per-command histogram. With
.B \-o
.I json
(or
.BR \-\-json )
it emits the same figures as a machine-readable object.
.SS ztmux graph
.B ztmux graph
renders the session\(->window\(->pane tree as a diagram. Select the format with
.B \-o
.IR dot | mermaid | html
(default
.BR mermaid ):
Graphviz DOT, Mermaid, or a self-contained HTML page that draws the Mermaid
diagram. Useful for documentation and screenshots, e.g.
.RS
.EX
ztmux graph \-o dot | dot \-Tpng > tree.png
ztmux graph \-o html > tree.html
.EE
.RE
.SS ztmux watch
.B ztmux watch
is a top-like live monitor: a table of every pane's process with %CPU, %MEM,
RSS, and state (joined from
.BR ps ),
refreshed a few times a second and sortable by CPU, memory, or command.
Keys:
.BR j / k " or " \(ua / \(da
move,
.B s
cycle the sort,
.B r
refresh now, and
.BR q " or " Escape
quit.
.SS ztmux events
.B ztmux events
streams server lifecycle changes as newline-delimited JSON: session, window,
and pane created/closed/renamed, window layout changes, pane command changes and
deaths, and client attach/detach. It diffs successive snapshots, so a client can
subscribe to changes instead of re-polling.
.B \-n
.I ms
sets the poll interval (default 500) and
.B \-\-count
.I N
exits after N events. It runs until interrupted otherwise.
.SS ztmux ps
.B ztmux ps
prints a one-shot, pipeable table of every pane's process \(en pane id,
location, command, pid, %CPU, %MEM, RSS, and state (joined from
.BR ps ),
sorted by CPU. It is the non-interactive complement to
.BR "ztmux watch" .
With
.B \-o
.I json
(or
.BR \-\-json )
it emits a JSON array.
.SS ztmux snapshot
.B ztmux snapshot
dumps the whole server as a single nested JSON document
(sessions \(-> windows \(-> panes, plus the client list) \(en a convenient
primitive for external tooling. It is read-only and is not a save/restore
format.
.SS ztmux prune
.B ztmux prune
finds and removes cleanup candidates: dead panes
.RB ( \-\-dead ),
window-less sessions
.RB ( \-\-empty ),
and detached sessions idle beyond a threshold
.RB ( \-\-idle
.IR seconds ).
With no selector, both
.B \-\-dead
and
.B \-\-empty
apply. It is
.B dry-run by default
(prints what it would remove); pass
.B \-f
or
.B \-\-force
to actually kill.
.B \-o
.I json
emits the plan as JSON.
.SS ztmux layout
.B ztmux layout
.I name
.RB [ \-t
.IR window ]
applies a named layout preset to a window: the five built-in tmux layouts
.RB ( even-h ", " even-v ", " main-h ", " main-v ", " tiled )
plus composite presets
.RB ( dev ", " ide ", " grid )
that create panes.
.B "ztmux layout list"
lists the presets. It is
.B dry-run by default
(prints the commands); pass
.B \-f
or
.B \-\-apply
to run them.
.SS ztmux find
.B ztmux find
.I query
searches every pane in the server and prints the ones whose command, current
path, title, or enclosing window name contains
.I query
(a case-insensitive substring match). Each row shows the pane id, its
.RI ( session : window . pane )
location, the command, which fields matched, and the path. It exits non-zero
when nothing matched, so it composes in shell
.B if
tests.
.B \-o
.I json
emits the matches as a JSON array.
.SS ztmux recent
.B ztmux recent
lists the sessions ranked by last activity, most-recently-active first, with a
compact relative age for both activity and creation time. It is the pipeable
"jump back to what I was last doing" primitive.
.B \-o
.I json
emits the rows as a JSON array (activity and creation kept as raw Unix
seconds).
.SS ztmux usage
.B ztmux usage
aggregates each pane's CPU%, memory%, and resident-set size by session and
prints one row per session, busiest (by CPU) first \(em the "which session is
eating the machine" view.
.B \-o
.I json
emits the rollup as a JSON array.
.SS ztmux grep
.B ztmux grep
.I pattern
captures every pane and prints the lines whose contents contain
.I pattern
(a case-insensitive substring), one
.RI ( location : line : " text)"
per match. Where
.B find
matches pane metadata,
.B grep
matches what is actually on the screen. By default only the visible screen is
searched; pass
.B \-a
or
.B \-\-history
to search the full scrollback. It exits non-zero when nothing matched.
.B \-o
.I json
emits the matches as a JSON array.
.SS ztmux peek
.B ztmux peek
captures the visible contents of every pane and prints each under a header
identifying it \(em the "show me every screen at once" view.
.B \-t
.I substr
limits the dump to panes whose
.RI ( session : window . pane )
location contains
.IR substr .
.B \-o
.I json
emits an array of
.RI { pane , location , command , content }
objects.
.SS ztmux bcast
.B ztmux bcast
.I command
sends
.I command
to every pane matching the filters \(em the cross-server generalisation of
.BR synchronize-panes .
.B \-c
.I substr
restricts to panes whose running command contains
.IR substr ;
.B \-s
.I session
restricts to one session; both may be combined. The command is sent literally
followed by Enter unless
.B \-N
or
.B \-\-no\-enter
is given. It is
.B dry-run by default
(prints the panes it would target); pass
.B \-f
or
.B \-\-force
to actually send.
.SS ztmux pstree
.B ztmux pstree
walks the OS process table and prints the full descendant process tree rooted
at each pane's process \(em the "what is actually running in here" view, where
.B ps
shows only the pane's own shell. A pane whose process has exited shows
.BR "(no process)" .
.B \-o
.I json
emits a nested JSON document per pane.
.SS ztmux ports
.B ztmux ports
lists every listening TCP socket and maps each back to the pane it runs under
by walking the process tree, answering "which pane is my dev server in". A
socket owned by no pane is still listed with a
.B \-
location. It degrades quietly to an empty table when
.BR lsof (8)
is unavailable.
.B \-o
.I json
emits the rows as a JSON array.
.SS ztmux info
.B ztmux info
.I target
resolves
.I target
\(em a pane id
.RI ( %N ),
a
.RI ( session : window . pane )
location, or a session name \(em to one pane and prints everything the query
layer knows about it: identity and geometry, its process id/command and
CPU/memory/RSS, and the tail of its current screen.
.B \-o
.I json
emits the same as one object.
.SS Default key bindings
For convenience each extension is also bound under the prefix key (these
bindings are original to
.B ztmux
and are added on top of the ported
.BR tmux (1)
defaults, which stay unchanged):
.RS
.TP
.B prefix C\-d
open the dashboard
.TP
.B prefix S
open the interactive picker
.TP
.B prefix T
show the server tree
.TP
.B prefix H
run the health check
.TP
.B prefix W
open the live process monitor
.TP
.B prefix I
show the stats report
.TP
.B prefix G
show the tree diagram
.RE
.PP
Each opens the tool in a
.B display\-popup
pointed at the current server, so they work from any attached client. The
streaming
.B events
subcommand runs until interrupted and is pipe oriented, so it is not bound by
default.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B TMUX
Set by the server for each pane to identify the socket, session, and pane of
the client.
.TP
.B TMUX_TMPDIR
Directory under which the per-user socket directory
.RI ( tmux- UID )
is created; defaults to
.IR /tmp .
.TP
.B TMUX_CONF
Colon-separated list of configuration file paths overriding the default
search path.
.TP
.B EDITOR
.TQ
.B VISUAL
Used to select the editor for interactive editing.
.SH FILES
.TP
.IR $TMUX_TMPDIR /tmux- UID /
The directory holding
.B ztmux
server sockets for the user
.IR UID ;
by default
.IR /tmp/tmux- UID / .
The default socket is named
.IR default .
.TP
.I ~/.tmux.conf
Default per-user configuration file. The full default search path is
.IR /etc/tmux.conf ,
.IR ~/.tmux.conf ,
.IR $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/tmux/tmux.conf ,
and
.IR ~/.config/tmux/tmux.conf .
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR tmux (1)
.PP
The upstream
.BR tmux (1)
sources are vendored under
.I vendor/tmux
in the ztmux repository as the reference this port is validated against, and a
parity suite checks
.B ztmux
output byte-for-byte against them.
.SH AUTHORS
MenkeTechnologies. Ported against the tmux C sources by Nicholas Marriott
and contributors.
