.\" ztmuxall(1) — comprehensive all-in-one man page for ztmux
.\" Modeled after zshall(1): every section in one document.
.\" Render with:  man -l man/man1/ztmuxall.1
.TH ZTMUXALL 1 "2026-07-12" "ztmux 3.7.15" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
ztmuxall \- the ztmux comprehensive reference (sessions, windows, panes, the command language, and the port model)
.SH OVERVIEW
This is the all-in-one
.B ztmux
manual, modeled on
.BR zshall (1).
It concatenates the major sections of the ztmux reference into a single page
so you can search with
.RB \` / \|'.
.B ztmux
is a from-source port of
.BR tmux (1)
to Rust; where behavior is unspecified here it follows upstream
.BR tmux (1).
.SH 1. INVOCATION
.B ztmux
.RB [ \-2CDlNuVv ]
.RB [ \-c
.IR shell-command ]
.RB [ \-f
.IR file ]
.RB [ \-L
.IR socket-name ]
.RB [ \-S
.IR socket-path ]
.RB [ \-T
.IR features ]
.RI [ command
.RI [ flags ]]
.PP
With no arguments a new session is created and attached. With a
.I command
the client connects to the server (starting one if necessary), runs the
command, and exits.
.SH 2. CONCEPTS
.TP
.B Server
A single background process holding all state. Started on demand.
.TP
.B Session
A collection of windows. Sessions can be detached and reattached.
.TP
.B Window
A full-screen workspace linked into one or more sessions.
.TP
.B Pane
A rectangular split of a window, backed by its own pseudo terminal.
.SH 3. COMMON COMMANDS
.TP
.B new-session
Create a new session.
.TP
.B attach-session
Attach the current terminal to an existing session.
.TP
.B detach-client
Detach the current client from its session.
.TP
.B list-sessions
List all sessions managed by the server.
.TP
.B new-window \fR/\fP \fBsplit-window
Create a new window, or split the current pane.
.TP
.B send-keys
Send key presses to a pane.
.TP
.B kill-server
Terminate the server and every session it holds.
.SH 4. SOCKET NAMESPACE
.B ztmux
sockets live under a per-user directory
.RI ( /tmp/ztmux- UID
by default), keeping ztmux servers separate from
.BR tmux (1)
servers on the same host. Override the socket with
.B \-L
(name) or
.B \-S
(full path).
.SH 5. CONFIGURATION
On start the server reads
.I ~/.ztmux.conf
(or the file given with
.BR \-f ),
a list of
.B ztmux
commands run in order.
.SH 6. THE PORT MODEL
The ztmux repository vendors a read-only reference under
.IR vendor/ :
.I vendor/tmux
(the upstream tmux C sources \(em the source of truth this port is validated
against). The living port is the crate at the repository root. See the port
report at
.I docs/port_report.html
for per-function C-to-Rust coverage.
.SH 7. EXIT STATUS
.B ztmux
exits zero on success and non-zero on error (an unknown command, an
unreachable server, or a failed operation).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR tmux (1),
.BR ztmux (1)
.SH AUTHORS
MenkeTechnologies. Ported against the tmux C sources by Nicholas Marriott
and contributors.
